LTTng calibrate command documentation
Mathieu Desnoyers, August 6, 2011

The LTTng calibrate command can be used to find out the combined average
overhead of the LTTng tracer and the instrumentation mechanisms used.
This overhead can be calibrated in terms of time or using any of the PMU
performance counter available on the system.

For now, the only calibration implemented is that of the kernel function
instrumentation (kretprobes).


* Calibrate kernel function instrumentation

Let's use an example to show this calibration. We use an i7 processor
with 4 general-purpose PMU registers. This information is available by
issuing dmesg, looking for "generic registers".

This sequence of commands will gather a trace executing a kretprobe
hooked on an empty function, gathering PMU counters LLC (Last Level
Cache) misses information (see lttng add-context --help to see the list
of available PMU counters).

(as root)
lttng create calibrate-function
lttng enable-event calibrate --kernel --function lttng_calibrate_kretprobe
lttng add-context --kernel -t perf:LLC-load-misses -t perf:LLC-store-misses \
		-t perf:LLC-prefetch-misses
lttng start
for a in $(seq 1 10); do \
	lttng calibrate --kernel --function;
done
lttng destroy
babeltrace -n $(ls -1drt ~/lttng-traces/calibrate-function-* | tail -n 1)

The output from babeltrace can be saved to a text file and opened in a
spreadsheet (e.g. oocalc) to focus on the per-PMU counter delta between
consecutive "calibrate_entry" and "calibrate_return" events. Note that
these counters are per-CPU, so scheduling events would need to be
present to account for migration between CPU. Therefore, for calibration
purposes, only events staying on the same CPU must be considered.

The average result, for the i7, on 10 samples:

                             Average     Std.Dev.
perf_LLC_load_misses:		5.0       0.577
perf_LLC_store_misses:		1.6       0.516
perf_LLC_prefetch_misses:	9.0      14.742

As we can notice, the load and store misses are relatively stable across
runs (their standard deviation is relatively low) compared to the
prefetch misses. We can conclude from this information that LLC load and
store misses can be accounted for quite precisely, but prefetches within
a function seems to behave too erratically (not much causality link
between the code executed and the CPU prefetch activity) to be accounted
for.
